# Tock OT Notes 2/28/2020

Present:
- Laura Abbott, Oxide Computer
- Brad Campbell (Chair),  University of Virginia
- Jon Flatley, Google
- Garret Kelly, Google
- Patrick Mooney, Oxide Computer
- Bryan Cantrill, Oxide Computer
- Andrey, Google
- Dom, Google
- Vadim, Google
- Alphan, Google
- Philip Levis, Stanford University/Google
- Johnathan Van Why, Google

## TODO
- Google: Work on OpenTitan on Tock roadmap
- @bradjc: Send out when to meet for scheduling a meeting time
- @bradjc: Comment on [#1632](https://github.com/tock/tock/pull/1632) re: tockloader

## Intro
- Joining today are folks from OpenTitan on Chromebook, who are considering Tock
  on OpenTitan for Chromebook.

## Updates
- Laura: Good progress on improving support for RISC-V on libtock-rs, including
  adding CI support.

## Tock on OpenTitan Roadmap
- Dom: Chromebook team is interested, but is there a roadmap or documentation
  that outlines a plan for developement?
- Brad: We've discussed goals and objectives, but no concrete roadmap exists.
- Dom: Google will work on generating a roadmap over the next couple weeks and
  solicit feedback.
- Brad: Will it include changes to libtock-rs?
- Johnathan: No, will focus on aspects in the core of the charter.
- Garret: Need libtock-rs support, but we want to leave that to core.
- Andre: What is the vision for OpenTitan support? Need a system architecture
  goal to drive the roadmap.

## Future of libtock-rs
- Bryan: Need robust libtock-rs support for hardware root of trust applications.
- Google: Agreed, and libtock-rs needs a revamp to make that possible.
- Johnathan: OT WG should not own libtock-rs, that should be left to core.
- Laura: Need reliable RISC-V support in libtock-rs
- General question is should that fall under this WG since it is so important?
- Johnathan: Would not be good for the community to try to take ownership here.
- Google: There is progress on improving libtock-rs, Johnathan has been working on that.
- Brad: We can see how things progress over the next few weeks and revisit if
  something needs to change to ensure progress for libtock-rs.
- Bryan: Libtock-rs is a pressing need, can we wait?
- Johnathan: We have enough time to make sure we end up on a good design. The
  design space is large, so that will take time, but better to have a proper
  design then something working but we are unhappy with. Bryan: Agreed.

## Meeting Time
- Not a great time for UK.
- Will try to find new time slot.

## Tock Threat Model
- Check out https://github.com/tock/tock/pull/1632, provide feedback.
- Phil provided background, came from discussions at Tock World 4.
- Johnathan: Thanks to Laura for suggestions, still a work in progress.
