# Tock OT Notes 4/2/2020

Present:
- Brad Campbell (Chair), University of Virginia
- Jon Flatley, Google
- Phil Levis, Stanford
- Silvestrs Timofejevs, lowRISC
- Laura Abbott, Oxide Computer
- Johnathan Van Why, Google


## Updates
- Phil: Progress on time HIL updates, working on implementations now.
- Brad: I've been tagging PRs as opentitan-wg in tock/tock, please review when
  you have a chance.
- Laura: Not much new in libtock-rs. Re-factoring work is on-going.
- Johnathan: Making progress on lightweight libtock-rs core. Still will be a
  couple weeks until the experiment shows promise or not.

## HMAC
- https://github.com/tock/tock/pull/1702
- Phil: questions on the interface, and how much design to do now given this
  would be a new HIL.
- Also highlights tension between OT and core working groups, since HIL would
  fall under core, technically.
- Brad: Probably worth making sure the interface is not too hardware specific,
  as that quickly presents roadblocks for other developers.
- Phil: Alistair's interface mimics the AES interface with a base trait and then
  other traits with configure functions. Separates out control path, and allows
  for a shared data path.
- Brad: Alternative in https://github.com/tock/tock/pull/1727
- Gives us an opportunity to compare the approaches.
